2023-09-XX-simplifying-firmware-update.md: add post about FUM (#538)
3mdeb/news-and-ideas: blog/content/post/2023-09-12-simplifying-firmware-update.md

---

> title: 'Simplifying Firmware Updates in Dasharo'

Reviewer: I believe I wrote this only in Jira, but please change the title to something like: 'Optimizing Firmware Updates: Dasharo's Firmware Update Mode for NovaCustom Laptops. WDYT @macpijan

Author: Fixed in 4c668f3b2b9c72cecbb77c52366aacbc7783a1ca. Let's continue the review in the other (open) PR

  write to the BIOS flash. This code is responsible for EFI variables, which
  are stored in the BIOS flash. Whenever the OS attempts to enable writes to the
  SPI flash, an SMI is fired and a handler, installed by the firmware, checks if
  the write attempt was made in SMM. If it wasn't, then the SMI handler disables
  writes to BIOS flash and returns control to OS.

- UEFI Secure Boot: This feature verifies the OS's bootloader using a
  cryptographic signature. The Linux kernel enables Lockdown mode when SB is
  enabled, which among other things disables direct access to /dev/mem, which
  prevents access to the SPI flash controller.

![img](/img/whack-a-mole.jpg)
_Pictured: An accurate summary of SMM_BWP_

All these features prevent a malicious actor from installing malicious firmware,
but it also prevents the user from updating firmware. Up until this point, we
have been recommending that users enable these locks for daily usage, but disable
them whenever they want to update firmware. Recognizing that this can be an
inconvenient, error prone process, we've added a new feature to make it easier:
Firmware Update Mode.

> ## Firmware Update Mode

Reviewer: This section sounds great overall, but it could be improved by adding bullet points (or graphics) that highlight the key features and benefits of Firmware Update Mode. We could also add more content about benefits for end users. 

For example:
1. Easy Activation
2. Temporary Locks Suspension
3. User-Friendly Updates
4. Automatic Exit

Reviewer: @mkopec your changes sound even better than my proposition. Thanks, resolving this thread.

Firmware Update Mode is an one-time boot mode that disables firmware protections
for the duration of one boot, allowing the user to boot into a firmware update
environment (Dasharo Tools Suite or OS of their own choice), update to the
latest version and reboot, which automatically exits Firmware Update Mode. Here

> is a demo of the new FW update flow on NovaCustom laptops:

Reviewer: Please add a CTA with links, and information that if someone owns a NovaCustom laptop with a Dasharo, they can experience the simplicity of a new Firmware Update Mode themselves. However, please include a note that this feature is available from the releases between v1.7.0 and v1.8.0+ for NovaCustom NV4x ADL (12th Gen) and NovaCustom NS5x/NS7x ADL (12th Gen), as well as between v1.5.0 and v1.6.0+ for NovaCustom NS5x/NS7x TGL (11th Gen) and NovaCustom NV4x TGL (11th Gen). Additionally, please add links to the release notes for the respective hardware in the description on docs.dasharo. 

Maybe something like (but somehow shorter):

> Firmware Update Mode is now available for NovaCustom laptops with Dasharo firmware. For NovaCustom NV4x ADL (12th Gen) and NovaCustom NS5x/NS7x ADL (12th Gen), you can access it in firmware versions between v1.7.0 and v1.8.0+. If you have NovaCustom NS5x/NS7x TGL (11th Gen) or NovaCustom NV4x TGL (11th Gen), this feature can be found in firmware versions between v1.5.0 and v1.6.0+
> For detailed information on these firmware releases, visit our documentation page [here](https://docs.dasharo.com/unified/novacustom/overview/). Now, you can ensure your NovaCustom laptop is always up-to-date with the latest enhancements and improvements.

> {{< youtube vHwYjoBo_XU >}}

Author: https://github.com/Dasharo/docs/pull/644 probably needs to be merged first.

> ## What's next?

Reviewer: Could you please add a sentence or two  summarizing our commitment to improving the update process and making it even more user-friendly in the future.

Author: The end of this paragraph was meant to express this. Should I add more?

The "proper" way to do firmware updates in the UEFI world is to use UEFI Capsule
Updates. In fact, it's one of Microsoft's requirements for PC vendors to be able
to put Windows stickers and labels on their products.

UEFI Capsule Updates work by putting the firmware updates and relevant metadata
into a single "capsule", which is passed to the UEFI firmware. UEFI then
verifies capsule's digital signature and determines how to update the device.
A capsule update may contain UEFI, FW for Embedded Controller, or for any other
on-board peripherals.

Capsule Updates are also supported under Linux by the fwupd / LVFS project, as
well as various BSD derivatives, support for which we helped develop in the

> past few years. TODO link to relevant blogposts

Author: Thanks for catching that TODO, both me and miczyg missed it...

Wanted to link to our blog posts about fwupd for BSD: https://blog.3mdeb.com/2021/2021-06-14-fwupd-freebsd-status/

> past few years. TODO link to relevant blogposts

Reviewer: Okay, I don't see links to Matrix channels, but there are probably enough links in this post already. thanks, @mkopec

---
title: 'Simplifying Firmware Updates in Dasharo'
abstract: "Updating your firmware is an important part of keeping your device
          secure and reliable. Making this process as easy and reliable as
          possible is, therefore, a big focus for Dasharo. In this article we'll

>           dive into the latest feature that make that process a bit easier, and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          dive into the latest feature that makes the update process a bit easier, and
```

Author: Fixed in eb660858d2cc0c15dfd4a7cce6caee520ad9831a

          talk about where we want to go from here."
cover: /covers/dasharo-sygnet.svg
author: michal.kopec
layout: post
published: true
date: 2023-09-12
archives: "2023"

tags:
  - coreboot
  - UEFI
categories:
  - Firmware

---

# Introduction

The word *firmware* comes from the fact that it sits somewhere in between
*soft*ware and *hard*ware. This term refers to the fact that firmware provides
an abstraction layer for hardware, so that software (e.g. OS) can make use of it
in a more generic manner.

Firmware also sits between hardware and software in a different category, which

> is how hard it is to modify. While software is easy to modify and update,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
is "how hard it is to modify". While software is easy to modify and update,
```

It is actually hard to understand the meaning. I supposed this is what was in your mind right?

Author: Exactly. Suggestion applied in eb660858d2cc0c15dfd4a7cce6caee520ad9831a

hardware is set in stone and cannot be fixed so easily (at least without

> recalling devices and replacing components). Firmware, again, sits somewhere in

Reviewer 2: What does recalling devices mean here?

Author: As in the manufacturer takes them back for repair / replacement, see https://support.lenovo.com/us/en/solutions/ht004883-battery-recall or https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Volkswagen_emissions_scandal#Vehicle_recall_and_consequences

between those two.

While software typically resides on easily re-writable, fast, dense media,
firmware is usually stored separately. On x86, the boot firmware resides in SPI
flash chips, which is typically mapped by the chipset just below the first 4GB

> of memory, which is a carryover from early x86 processors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of memory, which is a legacy of early x86 processors.
```

Author: Fixed by eb660858d2cc0c15dfd4a7cce6caee520ad9831a

  the write attempt was made in SMM. If it wasn't, then the SMI handler disables
  writes to BIOS flash and returns control to OS.

- UEFI Secure Boot: This feature verifies the OS's bootloader using a
  cryptographic signature. The Linux kernel enables Lockdown mode when SB is
  enabled, which among other things disables direct access to /dev/mem, which
  prevents access to the SPI flash controller.

![img](/img/whack-a-mole.jpg)

*Pictured: An accurate summary of SMM_BWP*

All these features prevent a malicious actor from installing malicious firmware,
but it also prevents the user from updating firmware. Up until this point, we
have been recommending that users enable these locks for daily usage, but disable
them whenever they want to update firmware. Recognizing that this can be an
inconvenient, error prone process, we've added a new feature to make it easier:
Firmware Update Mode.

# Firmware Update Mode

Firmware Update Mode is an one-time boot mode that disables firmware protections
for the duration of one boot, allowing the user to boot into a firmware update
environment (Dasharo Tools Suite or OS of their own choice), update to the

> latest version and reboot back into a secure environment. Here is a demo of

Reviewer 2: >  reboot back into a secure environment.

Assuming that the update process preserves the UEFI settings. I guess it was not done before (I think I advised to introduce this to the latest DTS to perform MSI firmware update).  Our documentation does not instruct how to preserve UEFI settings though.

Author: Good point, changed the wording in eb660858d2cc0c15dfd4a7cce6caee520ad9831a
